Marginal integrity of low-shrinkage and methacrylate-based composite resins:Effect of three different hemostatic agents.

 Moisture control is very important in restorative procedures indentistry. Use of hemostatic agents helps control moisture; however, they mightresult in changes on enamel and dentin surfaces, affecting composite resin bondquality. The aim of this in vitro study was to evaluate the marginal microleakageof two different composite resins with the use of three different hemostaticagents.
 Standardized Class V cavities were prepared on the buccaland lingual surfaces of 48 premolars with cervical margins 1 mm apical to thecementoenamel junction (CEJ). The samples were randomly divided into 8 groups. Ingroups 1 to 4, an etch-and-rinse adhesive (Adper Single Bond) was applied as the bonding system, followed by exposure to different hemostatic agent: group 1: nohemostatic agent (control); group 2: ViscoStat; group 3: ViscoStat Clear; andgroup 4: trichloracetic acid, as hemostatic agents. The cavities were restoredwith Z-250 composite resin. In group 5 to 8 Silorane System Adhesive (Filtek P90 Adhesive) was applied as a bonding agent, followed by exposure to differenthemostatic agents in a manner similar to that in groups 1to 4. The cavities were restored with Filtek P90, a low-shrinkage composite resin. The samples in eachgroup were evaluated for dye penetration under a stereomicroscope at ×36 after 24hours and a 500-round thermocycling procedure at enamel and dentin margins.Statistical analysis was carried out using Kruskal-Wallis and Mann-Whitney tests (α=0.05).
 Z-250 composite resin exhibited significantly higher dentin microleakagescores compared to Filtek P90 (P = 0.004). Trichloracetic acid increased dentinmicroleakage with Filtek P90 (P=0.033).
 Under the limitations of this in vitro study, application ofhemostatic agents did not affect microleakage of the two tested composite resins except for trichloracetic acid that increased marginal microleakage when usedwith Filtek P90.
