Use of leukocyte and platelet-rich fibrin (L-PRF) in periodontally acceleratedosteogenic orthodontics (PAOO): Clinical effects on edema and pain.

 Demand for shorter treatment time is common in orthodontic patients. Periodontally Accelerated Osteogenic Orthodontics (PAOO) is a somewhat newsurgical procedure which allows faster tooth movement via combining orthodonticforces with corticotomy and grafting of alveolar bone plates. Leukocyte andPlatelet-Rich Fibrin (L-PRF) possess hard- and soft-tissue healing properties.Further, evidence of pain-inhibitory and anti-inflammatory potential is growing. Therefore, this study explores the feasibility, intra- and post-operative effectsof using L-PRF in PAOO in terms of post-operative pain, inflammation, infectionand post-orthodontic stability.
 A pilot prospective observational study involving a cohort of 11 patients was carried out. A Wilcko's modified PAOO technique with L-PRF(incorporated into the graft and as covering membrane) was performed withinformed consent. Post-surgical pain, inflammation and infection were recordedfor 10 days post-operatively, while the overall orthodontic treatment andpost-treatment stability were followed up to 2 years.
 Accelerated wound healing with no signs of infection or adversereactions was evident. Post-surgical pain was either "mild" (45.5%) or "moderate"(54.5%). Immediate post-surgical inflammation was either "mild" (89.9%) or"moderate" (9.1%). Resolution began on day 4 where most patients experiencedeither "mild" or no inflammation (72.7% and 9.1%, respectively). Completeresolution was achieved in all patients by day 8. The average orthodontictreatment time was 9.3 months. All cases were deemed stable for 2 years.
 L-PRF is simple and safe to use in PAOO. Combination withtraditional bone grafts potentially accelerates wound healing and reducespost-surgical pain, inflammation, infection without interfering with toothmovement and/or post-orthodontic stability, over a 2 years period; thusalleviating the need for analgesics and anti-inflammatory medications.
