Solar Irradiance Changes and Phytoplankton Productivity in Earth's OceanFollowing Astrophysical Ionizing Radiation Events.
Two atmospheric responses to simulated astrophysical ionizing radiation eventssignificant to life on Earth are production of odd-nitrogen species, especiallyNO2, and subsequent depletion of stratospheric ozone. Ozone depletion increasesincident short-wavelength ultraviolet radiation (UVB, 280-315 nm) and longer(>600 nm) wavelengths of photosynthetically available radiation (PAR,400-700 nm). On the other hand, the NO2 haze decreases atmospheric transmissionin the long-wavelength UVA (315-400 nm) and short-wavelength PAR. Here, we usethe results of previous simulations of incident spectral irradiance following an ionizing radiation event to predict changes in terran productivity focusing onphotosynthesis of marine phytoplankton. The prediction is based on a spectralmodel of photosynthetic response, which was developed for the dominant genera in central regions of the ocean (Synechococcus and Prochlorococcus), and onremote-sensing-based observations of spectral water transparency, temperature,wind speed, and mixed layer depth. Predicted productivity declined after asimulated ionizing event, but the effect integrated over the water column wassmall. For integrations taking into account the full depth range of PARtransmission (down to 0.1% of utilizable PAR), the decrease was at most 2-3%(depending on strain), with larger effects (5-7%) for integrations just to thedepth of the surface mixed layer. The deeper integrations were most affected bythe decreased utilizable PAR at depth due to the NO2 haze, whereas shallowerintegrations were most affected by the increased surface UV. Several factorstended to dampen the magnitude of productivity responses relative to increases insurface-damaging radiation, for example, most inhibition in the modeled strainsis caused by UVA and PAR, and the greatest relative increase in damaging exposureis predicted to occur in the winter when UV and productivity are low.