Autologous bone grafting with platelet-rich plasma for alveolar cleft repair inpatient with cleft and palate.
Giudice G, Cutrignelli DA, Leuzzi S, Robusto F, Sportelli P, Nacchiero E.

 Bone grafting of the alveolus has become an essential part of thecontemporary surgical management of the oral cleft. The aim of this retrospectivestudy was to evaluate the results of bone grafting in association with PRP(plateletrich plasma) to enhance osteogenesis and osteointegration.
 The study included 16 patients, aged between 9 and 11,affected with unilateral residual alveolar clefts, who underwent bone graftingusing secondary alveoplasty. The eight patients belonging to the control groupwere administered autologous bone graft alone while the study group, consistingof 8 patients, underwent autologous bone grafting in association with PRP. Allpatients had pre and post surgery orthodontic treatment. The statistical analysesincluded Student's t test, 2 test and Kaplan-Meir time to event analysis. Thep-value was considered significant if p<0.05. All statistical analyses wereperformed using SAS Software release 9.3 (SAS Institute, Cary, Nc).
 The control group (M 50%, mean age 10.2±2.3) underwent simple autologousbone graft while the study group (M 62.5%, mean age 9.9±2.2) was treated with acombination of autologous bone and PRP. No statistically significant differences were found between the two groups as regards age, gender and labial-palatal cleftclinical characteristics. 6, 12, 24 month follow-ups were performed by means ofclinical and radiographic investigations. None of the study group developedoronasal fistulas or experienced bone height, bone bridging and bone qualityloss; only two patients developed mild periodontal problems. The study group was able to undergo a significantly (p<0.001) earlier and shorter orthodontictreatment.
 In our experience, the use of PRP enhances the quality ofosteoplasty, accelerates "creeping substitution" and bone healing and favoursearlier orthodontic treatment.
