Novel double-stapling technique for distal oesophageal resection andoesophago-jejunal anastomosis.
Gentilli S, Portigliotti L, Davoli F, Roncon A, Rena O, Oldani A.

 The restoration of the digestive tract by performing an esophago-jejunalanastomosis (EJA) is a crucial step of the total gastric and distal esophagussurgical resection for esophago-gastric junction (EGJ) cancer. We have alreadyideated and tested on a cadaver model an innovative technique which could beuseful to minimize the risk of complications related to the phase of securing theanvil of the circular stapler prior to perform the EJA. This surgical techniquewas derived from the well-known "double-stapling Knight and Griffen" one that wasdescribed for the rectal resection. We used the following described technique in 20 patients with EGJ cancer and it is efficient, reliable, safe, easy to learnand easy to perform.
 From August 2014 to May 2015, 20 patients (14 male and 6female) underwent surgery for esophagogastric junction cancer: In all patients a distal esophageal resection and total gastrectomy was performed. Through thetrans-hiatal access, the free margins of the esophageal stump were suspended and the anvil of a circular stapler on a new dedicated and registered support bar wasinserted into the lumen. Subsequently, the linear suturing stapler is closed overthe bar and then fired to suture the distal stump of the esophagus; after theconfirmation of a negative margin, the bar is retracted and the push-rod of theanvil is pulled out through the linear suture. Finally, the anastomosis isperformed with the classic technique by using a circular stapler.
 No postoperative mortality occurred; postoperative course has beenuneventful for 18 patients. One patient developed anastomotic fistula that hasbeen treated conservatively with endoscopic prothesis, removed after 20 days. Onepatient developed in 3 POD myocardial infarction Mean Hospital stay has been 14days (range 7-20 days).
 The aim of our new procedure is the insertion the anvil of a common circular stapler without handsewn securing; this is to reduce the technicaldifficulties related to the hand-sewn securing into a deep and narrow anatomiclocation, typical of the trans-hiatal approach.
