Evaluation of surgery risk factor associated to antithrombotic therapy inpatients who underwent colorectal surgery.
Del Rio P, Sozzi F, Bertocchi E, Dell'Abate P, Perrone G, Arcuri MF, Sianesi M.

 Use of antiplatelet therapy in western people is common. The risk of bleeding related to surgical procedure or invasive procedure is higher.We want toanalyse the correlation between colorectal surgery, antiplatelet therapy andpostoperative surgical complications.
 We categorized: 176 cases treated for colorectal cancer and we recorded the following data: type of surgery, body max index (BMI), haemoglobin value(Hb); preoperative prothrombin time (PT) and blood transfusions pre andpostoperative and during surgery. The analysis focused on two groups: patientswho received antiplatelet therapy (AT - antiplatelet therapy) and patients whodidn't receive this therapy (NAT - not antiplatelet therapy).
 In the group of patients who underwent right emicolectomy, haemoglobinvalues were lower in patients who received antithrombotic therapy than inpatients who didn't receive this therapy with a statistical significance (p <0,05); the same datum resulted in patients who underwent left emicolectomy.Normal weight patients that received antiplatelet therapy had lower values ofhaemoglobin without statistical significance (p value not significant).Overweight patients who underwent therapy with antiplatelet agents had lesser Hb value than group that didn't performed this therapy (p < 0,05). Patients whoreceived AT showed a bigger percentage of blood transfusions regardless of typeof surgery than the second group with statistical significance Normal weightpatients showed a different incidence of blood transfusions between patients who underwent antiplatelet therapy (50%) and patients who didn't receive this therapy(29%) with statistic significance (p < 0,05). Overweight patients didn't present this significant difference. We analyzed the incidence of post-operativecomplications in normal weight patients and overweight patients and we showedthat the incidence of complications, both minor and major, was higher in patientswho underwent antiplatelet therapy than in the second group regardless of weight
 Antiplatelet therapy in patients who underwent invasive surgerychanges the incidence of some risk factors, such as bleeding, and ofpost-operative complications. This result underlines the importance of carefulhandling and preparation in patients receiving antithrombotic agents that have toundergo invasive surgery.
