The Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence in Earth's Solar Transit Zone.
Over the past few years, astronomers have detected thousands of planets andcandidate planets by observing their periodic transits in front of their hoststars. A related method, called transit spectroscopy, might soon allow studies ofthe chemical imprints of life in extrasolar planetary atmospheres. Here, weaddress the reciprocal question, namely, from where is Earth detectable byextrasolar observers using similar methods. We explore Earth's transit zone(ETZ), the projection of a band around Earth's ecliptic onto the celestial plane,where observers can detect Earth transits across the Sun. ETZ is between 0.520°and 0.537° wide due to the noncircular Earth orbit. The restricted Earth transit zone (rETZ), where Earth transits the Sun less than 0.5 solar radii from itscenter, is about 0.262° wide. We first compile a target list of 45 K and 37 Gdwarf stars inside the rETZ and within 1 kpc (about 3260 light-years) using theHipparcos catalogue. We then greatly enlarge the number of potential targets byconstructing an analytic galactic disk model and find that about 10(5) K and Gdwarf stars should reside within the rETZ. The ongoing Gaia space mission canpotentially discover all G dwarfs among them (several 10(4)) within the next 5years. Many more potentially habitable planets orbit dim, unknown M stars in ETZ and other stars that traversed ETZ thousands of years ago. If any of theseplanets host intelligent observers, they could have identified Earth as ahabitable, or even as a living, world long ago, and we could be receiving theirbroadcasts today. The K2 mission, the Allen Telescope Array, the upcoming Square Kilometer Array, or the Green Bank Telescope might detect such deliberateextraterrestrial messages. Ultimately, ETZ would be an ideal region to bemonitored by the Breakthrough Listen Initiatives, an upcoming survey that willconstitute the most comprehensive search for extraterrestrial intelligence sofar.