Impact of health and nutrition risks perception on the interest in pro-healthyfood on the example of bread.

 Bread is a basic food product in the diet of a majority of people. Itis a good source of energy and it is also abundant in carbohydrates.Simultaneously, because it is consumed on a large scale by Polish people, itprovides large amounts of salt and some additives like preservative and raisingagents. The perception of the risk influences the choice of food and impactseating behaviors. However, it is still unknown if there is an impact of perceivedrisk on the choice and the consumption of bread.
 The objective of the research was to assess the importance ofperceived health and nutrition risk in conditioning the willingness to buy bread with decreased amounts of salt and bread without preservative and raising agents.
 Empirical research was conducted in October 2014 in a groupof 1.014 adult consumers, with the use of the method of interview. The questions covered the following issues: the frequency of white and wholemeal breadconsumption, the willingness to consume bread with reduced salt content and oneproduced without the preservatives and raising agents, the self-assessment ofhealth and socio-demographic characteristics of respondents. To evaluate theperceived health and nutrition risks modification of Health Concern Scale wasused. Opinions on the tendency to purchase both kind of breads were comparedtaking into account socio-demographic characteristics, health risk, nutritionrisk and frequency of eating white and wholemeal bread. To determine thedifferences ANOVA and Tukey post hoc test at the significance level of p<0.05were used. The relations between variables were assessed using Pearson'scorrelation coefficient.
 There was a higher tendency to consume bread without preservatives andraising agents than with low salt content. Women, people over 55 years old, andpeople who often consume white bread were characterized by higher willingness to consume bread with reduced salt content. People with higher education, aged over 45 years, and those who rarely consumed wholemeal bread were more willing to eat bread without additives. The greater was the nutrition and health risk perceived by the person, the greater was the willingness to consume both types of bread.
 The importance of perceived risks in conditioning consumers'willingness to eat healthy food shows that the educational campaigns informingabout risky behaviors may promote behavioral change towards a more favorable foodchoice.
