Qualitative evaluation of diets of students at the University of the Third Age atKoszalin University of Technology.

 Nutrition plays an important role in the elderly stage of life. Aproper proportion of the individual nutritional ingredients in a diet maypositively impact the ageing body. This positive influence consists in slowingdown the undesired and unfavourable physiological alterations leading inevitably to the general weakness of the body.
 The aim of the paper was to perform a qualitative analysis with theStarzyńska scoring system for diets, the daily food rations (DFR), among studentsof the University of the Third Age at the Koszalin University of Technology(Poland).
 The studied materials consisted of the 7-day currentrecords made by 79 students (16 males and 63 females) of the University of theThird Age at the Koszalin University of Technology and the measurements of bodyweight, height and waistline. The records were qualitatively evaluated withStarzyńska's test.
 It was found that approximately half of the students were overweight or obese. The majority consumed the recommended number of meals. About 44% of thestudents consumed animal protein with all meals. Milk and cheese were ingesteddaily with at least two meals by approximately 11% of the students. Fruit andvegetables are eaten on a daily basis by about 60% of the students. Almost 40%ate wholegrain bread, groats, and dried legumes. The statistical analysis of the means for the points of individual indicators did not reveal any statisticallysignificant difference between women and men (p>0.05).
 Approximately ¾ of the evaluated diets were inaccurately formulated and required radical modification. The low frequency of animal protein, milk and cheese, wholegrain bread, groats and dried legume consumption may result indeficiencies in certain nutrients. Nutritional education is recommended, focusingon the correct way to formulate meals. The recorded level of overweight andobesity in the students indicates a need for a quantitative assessment ofconsumption considering, among others, the energy input in their diets.
