Natural mineral bottled waters available on the Polish market as a source ofminerals for the consumers. Part 1. Calcium and magnesium.

 Natural mineral waters may be an essential source of calcium,magnesium and other minerals. In bottled waters, minerals occur in an ionizedform which is very well digestible. However, the concentration of minerals inunderground waters (which constitute the material for the production of bottledwaters) varies. In view of the above, the type of water consumed is essential.
 The aim of the study was to estimate the calcium and magnesiumcontents in products available on the market and to evaluate calcium andmagnesium consumption with natural mineral water by different consumer groupswith an assumed volume of the consumed product.
 These represented forty different brands of natural mineralavailable waters on Polish market. These waters were produced in Poland or other European countries. Among the studied products, about 30% of the waters wereimported from Lithuania, Latvia, Czech Republic, France, Italy and Germany. Thecontent of calcium and magnesium in mineral waters was determined using flameatomic absorption spectrometry in an acetylene-air flame. Further determinations were carried out using atomic absorption spectrometer - ICE 3000SERIES-THERMO-England, equipped with a GLITE data station, background correction (a deuterium lamp) as well as other cathode lamps.
 Over half of the analysed natural mineral waters weremedium-mineralized. The natural mineral waters available on the market can becharacterized by a varied content of calcium and magnesium and a high degree ofproduct mineralization does not guarantee significant amounts of thesecomponents. Among the natural mineral waters available on the market, only a few feature the optimum calcium-magnesium proportion (2:1). Considering themineralization degree of the studied products, it can be stated that the largest percentage of products with significant calcium and magnesium contents can befound in the high-mineralized water group.
 For some natural mineral waters, the consumption of 1 litre dailymay ensure the recommended intake levels of calcium and magnesium in someconsumer groups to a considerable degree. For 1-3-year-old children it isrecommended to consume less than 1 litre daily of natural mineral waterscontaining an excess of 700 mg of calcium and 80 mg of magnesium in 1 litre.
