Laparoscopic management of pancreatic cancer. Our experience.
Ialongo P, Milella M, Pascazio B, Prestera A, Pannarale O, Panebianco A, Volpi A,Palasciano N.

 Minimally invasive techniques have a definite role in the surgical treatmentof several gastrointestinal tract cancers but there is still no widespread use ofthe laparoscopic approach for cancers of the head of the pancreas. The aim ofthis retrospective study is to review our experience from 2003 to 2013 in themanagement of pancreatic cancer with particular emphasis on the clinicalapplication of minimally invasive techniques.
 One hundred fifty-eight pancreatic cancer patients (median age 69,7±12,6years) with obstructive jaundice were enrolled in our study. One hundred eighteen(74,7%) had an endoscopic biliary stent, 68 patients (43,03%) were eligible forsurgery. Only 22 of the patients eligible for surgical intervention underwentpancreaticoduodenectomy (PD): 14 had open PD and 8 had laparoscopic PD (LPD).Thirteen of the PD patients had a pylorus-preserving procedure (8 open and 5laparoscopic procedures) whereas in 9 the pylorus was not preserved (6 open and 3laparoscopic procedures). The other 46 patients had un-resectable tumors and 34of them underwent palliative surgery consisting of gastrojejunal andhepatojejunal anastomosis (18 open and 6 laparoscopic procedures), andgastrojejunal anastomosis in 10 patients (4 open and 6 laparoscopic procedures). Ten patients had only explorative laparoscopy and 2 only explorative laparotomy.
 The resectability rate was 13,9%. The median age in patients treatedwith an endoscopic biliary stent was significantly higher than in those whounderwent surgery (73,2±13,3 years vs 64,4±9,6 years; p < 0,05). Operative timein LPD patients was significantly longer than in PD patients (521±68 minutes vs381±88 minutes; p<0.05). The hospital stay of patients who underwent PD wassignificantly longer than that of those who underwent palliative surgery (27±4days vs 10±5 days; p < 0.05). in PD patients the morbidity rate was 22,72 % andthe mortality rate 4.5%.
 In recent years laparoscopic surgery has become very important inoncologic surgery because it is minimally invasive and reduces postoperativecomplications and because there is sufficient evidence based data showing thatresults in terms of complications and survival are as good as the results ofconventional surgery. However the learning curve for laparoscopic cancer surgery of the head of the pancreas is steep and our results indicate that in LPDoperative time is significantly longer than in PD, and moreover the laparoscopic approach is not associated with a shorter hospital stay. Therefore LPD should be performed only in well-established laparoscopic and oncological centers with amultidisciplinary team.
