Sentinel lymph node biopsy in breast cancer New indications and our experience.
Zanghì G, Rinzirillo NM, Caponnetto AM, Vecchio R, Catania V, Leanza V.

 Owing to complexity and difficulty regarding evaluation of all the regional lymph nodes, the Sentinel Lymph Node Biopsy (SLNB) has represented inrecent years a suitable technique for setting lymph node status; it allowspathologists to focus on a small number of lymph nodes and stage patients withclinically negative lymph nodes; this sort of assessment leads surgeons to acorrect approach; on the contrary, the presence of metastases makes advisable to perform Axillary Lymph Node Dissection (ALND).
 From September 2008 to December 2013, 142 patientssuffering from breast cancer were enrolled. Mean age was 54 years (range 37-80), in 88 (62%) patients the lesion was localized to the right breast, while in theremaining 54 (38%) the disease was localized in the left breast. Also in 85 (60%)patients, the tumor involved the upper-outer quadrant, in 24 (17%) the lowerexternal quadrant, in 19 (13%) the upper-inner quadrant and in the remaining 14(10%) the inferior-internal quadrant.
 There were neither intra nor post-operative complications. The allremoved breast lesions were histologically malignant: 99 (70%) patients had ahistological diagnosis of invasive ductal, 30 (21%) of invasive lobular, 9 (6%)ductal in situ and 4 (3%) of mixed invasive cancer. Sentinel Lymph Node (SLN) wasalways identified and it was extemporaneously positive in 62 cases (44%): 40cases had macro-metastatic involvement whereas the remaining 22 cases hadmicro-metastases only. The definitive histological examination confirmed thepresence of micro-metastases in 18 cases, while in 2 cases there was asupra-staging to macro-metastases and in other 2 a sub-staging of Isolated Tumor Cells (ITC). None of the patients with micro-metastatic SLN involvement developedrecurrence within 24 months, whereas only one patient died after one year owingto at distance dissemination.
 Lymph node status has increasingly been getting one of the mostimportant prognostic factor. Consequently the bigger the tumor nodal involvement appears the worse the prognosis becomes. Our data confirm the main role of SLNBon managing surgical treatment of breast cancer.
