The role of particular tick developmental stages in the circulation of tick-bornepathogens affecting humans in Central Europe. 1. The general pattern.
Tick-borne pathogens are common in the natural environment, but their occurrence has a focal character. They occur in the natural environment in the form of theenzootic sources of infection. The general components include the animalreservoir, amplifiers and the efficient vector. However, the particular role ofcomponents can differ depending on the pathogen, the host range and possibletransmission routes. Animal reservoir of pathogen are vertebrate animals, beingthe hosts of pathogens. In Europe these are small or medium-sized mammals andsometimes birds that feed on the ground. The competence of an animal reservoir isdetermined by the ability to communicate the infection; long-term persistence of the pathogen in the host; long-duration of infectivity of the animal for ticks; asufficient number of animals in the endemic region. Amplifiers for ticks areartiodactyls. They are hosts for nymphs and adult ticks, thereby making itpossible for ticks to propagate and maintain the proper size of their population.Efficient vector for pathogen are ticks. The first characteristic feature ofefficient vectors is feeding duration exceeding 24 hours; the high density of thetick population. The conditions necessary to consider ticks as efficient vectors are met in Central Europe by the Ixodes ricinus, Dermacentor reticulatus and D.marginatus ticks. There are the general differences in biology between Ixodespersulcatus complex ticks and Dermacentor ticks, affecting their different roleand ability in pathogens spreading - the range of hosts; the ability toinhabiting of various environments and resistance to unfavourable conditions; theduration of larvae and nymphs activity. The combination of tick's biology,pathogen ability to transmission, and mammal hosts' competence, determines theparticular role of larvae, nymphs and adults in pathogen circulation in thenatural environment, as well as transmission to new hosts.